Add determinism developer documentation (#5718)
NVIDIA/Megatron-LM: docs/developer/determinism/glossary.md

---
orphan: true
---

# Determinism glossary

This glossary is for the developer references. The user guide avoids these
abbreviations where possible. Terms are grouped: modes and guarantees first,
then measurement terms, parallelism, and model/kernel abbreviations.

## Modes and guarantees

| Term | Meaning |
| --- | --- |
| Deterministic mode | Execution with `--deterministic-mode`: `apply_determinism_to_args` validates/overrides unsupported features, sets the determinism env vars, and enables torch deterministic algorithms. Library code selects deterministic branches via `config.deterministic_mode` or `torch.are_deterministic_algorithms_enabled()`. |
| Default mode | Execution without `--deterministic-mode`. Also called "normal" or "ordinary" mode. |
| Torch deterministic algorithms | The global `torch.use_deterministic_algorithms(True)` state. It makes listed PyTorch ops select deterministic implementations and raises on ops with none; it is one ingredient of deterministic mode, not the whole contract. |

> | Bit-exact / bitwise identical | Two runs produce byte-identical values for the compared tensors or serialized metrics. The strongest claim used here; "identical loss curve" alone is weaker because logging precision can hide low-bit drift. |

Reviewer: > "identical loss curve" alone is weaker because logging precision can hide low-bit drift. 

Can we rephrase it into something like:

We are tracking "bitwise identical loss curve" for determinism verification?

I partially agree "identical loss curve" alone is weak, while it is still the practical way to verify determinism.

Here's my theory:
Based on this definition, we only need to track the loss to verify bitwise determinism. Because the loss acts as a reduced mean of the sampled logits—essentially functioning like a checksum hash—any token-level mismatch will automatically trigger a bitwise difference in the final loss/grad curve in several steps.

| Reproducible | Same result under the *same* conditions (allocation, caches, environment). Weaker than deterministic-across-allocations: a run can be reproducible within one allocation yet diverge on a different physical topology. |
| Cross-allocation | Comparison of runs that use independently assigned resources (fresh scheduler allocation, different physical nodes/rings), rather than repeated work in one allocation. The determinism target is cross-allocation bit-exactness. |

> | Same-allocation | Comparison of repeated runs inside one allocation/process-group topology. Useful evidence, but it cannot certify topology-independence. |

Reviewer: emm I pretty agree with the above Cross-allocation bit-exactness. what's the point to add same-allocation here?

> | Certificate / certified | A checked evidence artifact: an exact comparison (trace, dump, or serialized-metric) between independent runs that passed the required invariants (e.g. via `certify_traces.py`). "Certified" claims in these docs always name their scope. |

Reviewer: `certify_traces.py` is this part of the PR?

---
orphan: true
---

> # Determinism glossary

Reviewer 2: ```suggestion
# Determinism Glossary
```

Definitions for the determinism developer reference. The user guide avoids
these abbreviations where possible.

> ## The determinism contract

Reviewer 2: ```suggestion
## Determinism Contract
```

> **Bitwise determinism.** Given fixed inputs and seeds, a run yields identical

Reviewer 2: ```suggestion
- **Bitwise determinism**

  Given fixed inputs and seeds, a run yields identical numerical results
  every time, with everything else held constant. This includes input data
  and order, model recipe and configuration, parallelism layout (TP, PP,
  DP, EP, CP, VPP), container image and library versions (Megatron-Core,
  CUDA, cuDNN, NCCL, Transformer Engine, PyTorch, driver), NCCL settings,
  and hardware type and topology.

  The contract is about numerical results, not the computation graph.
  Kernel scheduling and execution order may vary as long as every
  floating-point reduction happens in the same order. Floating-point
  addition is not associative, and reduction order is the root cause of
  nearly all training non-determinism.
```

Reviewer 2: then delete lines 13-21

numerical results every time, with everything else held fixed: input data and
order, model recipe and configuration, parallelism layout (TP/PP/DP/EP/CP/VPP),
container image and library versions (Megatron-Core, CUDA, cuDNN, NCCL,
Transformer Engine, PyTorch, driver), NCCL settings, and hardware type and
topology. The contract is about numerical results, not the computation graph:
kernel scheduling and execution order may vary as long as every floating-point
reduction happens in the same order, because floating-point addition is not
associative and reduction order is the root cause of nearly all training
non-determinism.

> **Verification.** In practice determinism is verified by tracking the training

Reviewer 2: ```suggestion
- **Verification**

  Verify determinism by tracking training metrics (loss, gradient norm,
  params norm, num-zeros) for *bitwise-identical curves* across two
  independent runs. The loss works like a checksum of the model state
  because it is a reduction over the sampled logits. A mismatch anywhere
  propagates into a bitwise difference in the loss and gradient curve
  within a few steps.

  Console logs print at limited precision, so for a strict comparison use
  the full-precision serialized metrics (for example the TensorBoard event
  files) rather than the printed values.
```

Reviewer 2: then delete lines 24-30

metrics — loss, gradient norm, params norm, num-zeros — for **bitwise-identical
curves** across two independent runs. The loss works like a checksum of the
model state: it is a reduction over the sampled logits, so a mismatch anywhere
propagates into a bitwise difference in the loss/grad curve within a few steps.
Console logs print at limited precision, so for a strict comparison use the
full-precision serialized metrics (for example the TensorBoard event files)
rather than the printed values.

## Terms

| Term | Meaning |
| --- | --- |

> | Deterministic mode | Execution with `--deterministic-mode`: argument validation and environment defaults from `megatron/training/determinism.py`, plus `torch.use_deterministic_algorithms(True)`. Library code selects deterministic branches via `config.deterministic_mode` or `torch.are_deterministic_algorithms_enabled()`. |

Reviewer 2: ```suggestion
| Deterministic mode | Execution with `--deterministic-mode`. The argument validation and environment defaults from `megatron/training/determinism.py`, plus `torch.use_deterministic_algorithms(True)`. The library code selects deterministic branches using `config.deterministic_mode` or `torch.are_deterministic_algorithms_enabled()`. |
```

| Default mode | Execution without `--deterministic-mode`. |
| Bit-exact / bitwise identical | Byte-identical values for the compared tensors or serialized metrics (see "Verification" above). |

> | Reproducible | Same result under the same conditions (allocation, caches, environment). Weaker than the contract above: a run can repeat within one allocation and still differ on a different physical topology. |

Reviewer 2: ```suggestion
| Reproducible | Same result under the same conditions (allocation, caches, environment). This guarantee is weaker than the contract above. A run can repeat within one allocation and still differ on a different physical topology.|
```

> | Cross-allocation | Comparison of runs on independently assigned resources — a fresh scheduler allocation, generally different physical nodes and network rings. This is the determinism target, and it is the bar a test must meet to count as a determinism certificate: repeating work inside one allocation exercises less than the contract promises. |

Reviewer 2: ```suggestion
| Cross-allocation | This level compares runs on independently assigned resources, meaning a
fresh scheduler allocation with generally different physical nodes and
network rings. This is the determinism target and the bar a test must meet
to count as a determinism certificate. Repeating work inside one allocation
exercises less than the contract promises. |
```

| Collision-free (unique-index) write | An indexed write (`scatter`, `index_put_(accumulate=False)`) whose indices are unique, so no floating-point accumulation happens and ordering cannot change the result. Deterministic without a special kernel. |
| Fail closed | When deterministic mode encounters a feature it cannot vouch for, it rejects the configuration at validation time instead of silently running it. |

## Parallelism and infrastructure

| Term | Meaning |
| --- | --- |

> | MCore | Megatron Core, the model-parallel training library in this repository. |

Reviewer 2: ```suggestion
| MCore | Megatron Core: the model-parallel training library in this repository. |
```

| DP | Data parallelism: replicas process different batches and synchronize gradients. |
| TP | Tensor parallelism: one layer is partitioned across devices. |
| PP | Pipeline parallelism: consecutive layer ranges run on different devices. |
| VPP | Virtual pipeline parallelism: interleaved pipeline chunks that reduce pipeline idle time. |
| EP | Expert parallelism: experts are partitioned across devices. |
| CP | Context parallelism: one sequence is partitioned across devices. |
| A2A | All-to-all collective (MoE token dispatch/combine). A rank-indexed permutation, not a floating-point reduction. |
| TE | Transformer Engine, NVIDIA's transformer-kernel library. |
| wgrad / dgrad | Weight gradient / input gradient of a linear layer's backward pass. |

## Model abbreviations

| Term | Meaning |
| --- | --- |
| MoE | Mixture of Experts: a layer routes tokens to one or more expert networks. |
| MLA | Multi-Latent Attention: low-rank latent q/kv projections (DeepSeek family). |

> | DSV3 / DSV4 | DeepSeek-V3- / DeepSeek-V4-style model configurations. DSV3 combines MLA with fine-grained MoE; DSV4 additionally uses DSA sparse attention. |

Reviewer 2: ```suggestion
| DSV3 / DSV4 | DeepSeek-V3- / DeepSeek-V4-style model configurations. DSV3 combines MLA with fine-grained MoE. DSV4 additionally uses DSA sparse attention. |
```

---
orphan: true
---

# Determinism Glossary

Definitions for the determinism developer reference. The user guide avoids
these abbreviations where possible.

## Determinism Contract

> 

Reviewer 2: ```suggestion

The contract uses these definitions:

```

Author: Applied in 257e0ebf2.

  and order, model recipe and configuration, parallelism layout (TP, PP,
  DP, EP, CP, VPP), container image and library versions (Megatron-Core,
  CUDA, cuDNN, NCCL, Transformer Engine, PyTorch, driver), NCCL settings,
  and hardware type and topology.

  The contract is about numerical results, not the computation graph.
  Kernel scheduling and execution order may vary as long as every
  floating-point reduction happens in the same order. Floating-point
  addition is not associative, and reduction order is the root cause of
  nearly all training non-determinism.

- **Verification**

  Verify determinism by tracking training metrics (loss, gradient norm,
  params norm, num-zeros) for *bitwise-identical curves* across two
  independent runs. The loss works like a checksum of the model state
  because it is a reduction over the sampled logits. A mismatch anywhere
  propagates into a bitwise difference in the loss and gradient curve
  within a few steps.

  Console logs print at limited precision, so for a strict comparison use
  the full-precision serialized metrics (for example the TensorBoard event
  files) rather than the printed values.

## Terms

> 

Reviewer 2: ```suggestion

The following terms appear throughout the reference:

```

Author: Applied in 257e0ebf2.

| Term | Meaning |
| --- | --- |
| Deterministic mode | Execution with `--deterministic-mode`. The argument validation and environment defaults from `megatron/training/determinism.py`, plus `torch.use_deterministic_algorithms(True)`. The library code selects deterministic branches using `config.deterministic_mode` or `torch.are_deterministic_algorithms_enabled()`. |
| Default mode | Execution without `--deterministic-mode`. |

> | Bit-exact / bitwise identical | Byte-identical values for the compared tensors or serialized metrics (see "Verification" above). |

Reviewer 2: ```suggestion
| Bit-exact / bitwise identical | Byte-identical values for the compared tensors or serialized metrics (refer to "Verification"). |
```

Author: Applied in 257e0ebf2.

| Reproducible | Same result under the same conditions (allocation, caches, environment). This guarantee is weaker than the contract above. A run can repeat within one allocation and still differ on a different physical topology. |
| Cross-allocation | Comparison of runs on independently assigned resources: a fresh scheduler allocation with generally different physical nodes and network rings. This is the determinism target and the bar a test must meet to count as a determinism certificate. Repeating work inside one allocation exercises less than the contract promises. |
| Collision-free (unique-index) write | An indexed write (`scatter`, `index_put_(accumulate=False)`) whose indices are unique, so no floating-point accumulation happens and ordering cannot change the result. Deterministic without a special kernel. |
| Fail closed | When deterministic mode encounters a feature it cannot vouch for, it rejects the configuration at validation time instead of silently running it. |

> ## Parallelism and infrastructure

Reviewer 2: ```suggestion
## Parallelism and Infrastructure

The following abbreviations appear in parallelism and infrastructure discussions:

```

Author: Applied in 257e0ebf2.

| Term | Meaning |
| --- | --- |
| MCore | Megatron Core: the model-parallel training library in this repository. |
| DP | Data parallelism: replicas process different batches and synchronize gradients. |
| TP | Tensor parallelism: one layer is partitioned across devices. |
| PP | Pipeline parallelism: consecutive layer ranges run on different devices. |
| VPP | Virtual pipeline parallelism: interleaved pipeline chunks that reduce pipeline idle time. |
| EP | Expert parallelism: experts are partitioned across devices. |
| CP | Context parallelism: one sequence is partitioned across devices. |

> | A2A | All-to-all collective (MoE token dispatch/combine). A rank-indexed permutation, not a floating-point reduction. |

Reviewer 2: ```suggestion
| A2A | All-to-all collective (MoE token dispatch and combine). A rank-indexed permutation, not a floating-point reduction. |
```

Author: Applied in 257e0ebf2.

| TE | Transformer Engine, NVIDIA's transformer-kernel library. |
| wgrad / dgrad | Weight gradient / input gradient of a linear layer's backward pass. |

> ## Model abbreviations

Reviewer 2: ```suggestion
## Model Abbreviations

The following abbreviations appear in model discussions:

```

Author: Applied in 257e0ebf2.

| Term | Meaning |
| --- | --- |
| MoE | Mixture of Experts: a layer routes tokens to one or more expert networks. |

> | MLA | Multi-Latent Attention: low-rank latent q/kv projections (DeepSeek family). |

Reviewer 2: ```suggestion
| MLA | Multi-Latent Attention: low-rank latent qkv projections (DeepSeek family). |
```

Author: Applied in 257e0ebf2.
